I found out how deep the gap could be between the tremendously huge amount of data and the potential useful application of those data in the medical field. So, I have been thinking for a while and searched over a lot of public data sources among which I have found The Medical Expenditure Panel Survey (MEPS) obtained by the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ) at the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, a very good one to start. The collection of datasets began in 1996. It is described on the MEPS website as follows: “a set of large-scale surveys of families and individuals, their medical providers (doctors, hospitals, pharmacies, etc.), and employers across the United States. MEPS collects data on the specific health services that Americans use, how frequently they use them, the cost of these services, and how they are paid for, as well as data on the cost, scope, and breadth of health insurance held by and available to U.S. workers.” My goal has been to use these data as an invaluable source for understanding the trends of medical expenditure on different categories of medical conditions and related drugs over 20 years and build a framework that can be used to identify and predict the future trends in this field, which can ideally help reducing the costs in the healthcare system. The biggest challenge at the beginning has been understanding the data itself and how the different datasets are linked to each other. I have used Python in conjunction with R for data scraping and cleaning. I have also performed clustering for identifying different categories of medical conditions and multivariate regression analysis to find the trends of expenditure in each category.
This is an ongoing project and will be updated constantly.
